

I was flying on Lufthansa from Toronto, Canada to Frankfurt, Germany on a 747. The flight was delayed until about 9 PM and was uneventful until around midnight.

I was sitting in the emergency exit row over the starboard wing with two other guys in rows facing each other.

One of the guys looked out the window and commented that the lights of two planes that had been flying parallel to us were suddenly getting higher. That seemed odd and I did a quick calculation and figured out that after 3 hours of a 6 hour flight we had to be at our cruising altitude and nobody would be going up.

The conclusion then was that we must be going down!

But we would also have been about mid-Atlantic.

About then the captain came on the air and said something in German to the flight attendants who immediately spread out, one to each emergency row. The one who came to our row asked if one of the guys could move so she could sit beside the door. As soon as she sat down she reached for the handle on the door, but when she saw us staring at her she quickly let go of it and looked embarrassed.

We sat in an awkward silence for another couple of minutes until the captain came back on the PA, again in German. The flight attendants got up and started to wake up all the sleeping passengers. When they were finished they resumed their seats by the exits. I noticed that this time our attendant put her hand back on the lever to open the door - and didn’t remove it even though we stared at her. She wouldn’t respond to any questions.

Then the captain came back on the PA, this time in English, “Ladies and gentlemen, we are going to be coming down soon. As soon as the aircraft stops moving the emergency doors will open and I want everybody to get out of the aircraft as fast as possible so do not take your carry-on. It will be very cold outside so please put your coats on now.”

Cold outside! We were in the middle of the ocean! It would be worse than cold, it would be wet too!

I noticed too that the pilot didn’t use the word ‘landing’, he said ‘coming down’. The meaning was similar, but worse. Landing meant controlled, with wheels down. Coming down sounded much more ominous.

It was time to get worried.

A few more minutes passed and the ride started to get bumpy as it often does when you get close to the ground - or water I’d guess too.

There were no lights in sight anywhere as there always are when you’re coming in to land. Everything was pitch black outside except for the stars far above. So a lack of visibility wasn’t the reason we couldn’t see any lights. Even more scary!

Then the flaps came down and we could hear changes in the throttle.

We were very close to the end of the trip.

Then suddenly there were lights!

Blue lights!

There was a row of trucks with flashing blue lights on top and we were only a couple hundred feet up.

But there were no other lights in sight. Where were we?

There was no time to think though. Almost as soon as we saw the lights there was a bump as the wheels touched down.

I looked back and could see that the lights were moving. They had strung out and were chasing us down what must be a runway.

I looked across to the port side to see a big building with lots of lights go past. That must be the terminal but where?

We kept going until the building was far behind, at least a mile back or maybe more.

The plane finally stopped.

The engines shut down immediately. That was unusual too.

Silence.

A minute or so later the blue lights surrounded us. The trucks turned with their headlights all pointing inward. It felt sort of like the settlers with the natives all circling the wagons.

Nothing.

It seemed like about 10 minutes before anything else happened. Then the pilot came back on the PA and told us we had to leave the plane quickly but we could take out carry-on with us. And to bundle up. It was cold.

I got to my assigned exit behind the wing (we used all the doors, not just the one at the front). There was a long ladder coming up from a truck way down below. Among the dozens and dozens of lights were some yellow school busses and I was directed to one of them.

And yes, it was very cold. Snow everywhere.

As soon as the bus was full we headed back to the terminal building off in the distance. We deboarded at the bottom of a long set of stairs and had to go up to the jetway bridge where you’d normally get off a plane. It was very high up.

At the top were some airport staff handing out red wool blankets, one to each person. This wasn’t a good sign either.

I took my blanket and looked at the label. ‘Product of Iceland’ it said.

Ok, now I had an idea where we might be.

As I followed the stream of people going inside, there was a TV camera crew and a reporter trying to talk to each person coming in. “Hello”, he said to me. “Do you speak English?”

I affirmed that I did. Apparently some of the people on the plane didn’t.

“Were you on the plane that just came in hot? Will you let me interview you for Reykyavik Channel One?” he asked.

I told him, “Yes, I’ll let you interview me as long as you tell me what you meant by ‘the plane that came in hot’”.

So he proceeded to tell me that our plane had first reported that the sensors in our cargo hold had all reported increasingly hot temperatures and that there was a suspected fire. The fire extinguishers had been deployed and as soon as they’re empty FAA regulations order that the plane must land at the closest airport.

So where were we? This couldn’t be Reykjavik, it was way too small.

It turned out that we were at an old decommissioned SAC air base near Keflavik, a small village on the SW corner of Iceland and about 40 km west of Reykjavik. The air base had been converted to civilian use.

So, I gave my interview and by then it was announced that we would be staying the night. There were no hotels in Keflavik so we had to stay at the airport.

Thus started a very sleepless night trying to get some rest sitting on the hard, granite floor of the airport, all the lights blazing and the PA announcing flights every so often. Lots and lots of people constantly milling around.

The next morning Lufthansa provided breakfast for everybody - the breakfast from the plane that we were supposed to have been served shortly before landing in Frankfurt. This was followed a few hours later by a lunch trucked in from Reykjavik. It turned out that the restaurant in the Keflavik airport wasn’t big enough to handle all the additional people from our flight as the airport usually only handles small regional flights. The only reason we could land a 747 there was that the runways were originally made to handle big USAF bombers.

Meanwhile, we could look out and see our plane off in the distance, presumably as far away from the terminal as possible in case it exploded.

There was a rumour circulating that British Airways had a spare 747 big enough to handle us all and had offered to finish the flight for us but that Lufthansa had refused because of course they’d have to reimburse BA.

So we waited. And waited. And waited.

Eventually, the next night Lufthansa got our plane ready to fly again. The regulations are that a plane can’t fly without fully charged fire extinguishers and the Keflavik airport wasn’t equipped to fill the extinguishers on 747s. So they had to fly some in from Germany.

We finally arrived in Frankfurt very early the next morning. Of course the car rental where I’d reserved my ‘Mietwagon’ (rental car) was closed in the middle of the night. So I went to the cab stand and asked for a ride to the nearest hotel. I was told that without a reservation he wouldn’t take me anywhere. So I went to the phones to call a hotel but without German coins couldn’t use the phone. I couldn’t get German coins because all the money exchanges were closed for the night.

I really didn’t want to spend another night trying to sleep in an airport with no bed, and Frankfurt ‘Flughafen’ (airport) was a lot bigger and noisier than Keflavik, so I went back to the Lufthansa desk and laid out my plight.

The clerk at the desk asked if I was going anywhere from here. I told him that yes, I was headed for a town in Belgium called Scherpenheuvel. He asked if I was flying there. When I told him that no, I was driving but that I couldn’t get a car at that time of night his response was a cold and extremely brusque, rude brush-off, “Well, so Lufthansa has done their part and got you to your air destination. Goodbye. Go Away!”

I told him that the reason I couldn’t go any further was that Lufthansa had left me at the airport at a time of night when everything was closed but he wouldn’t be budged. “Go away!”, he repeated.

I finally found a luxury car rental that was open at that hour and got a much more expensive car than I had wanted, an Audi was the cheapest available.

I drove out of the airport with no real idea of how to get to Scherpenheuvel or indeed where I was. I’d either forgotten to ask for a map or they didn’t have maps, I don’t remember. I’d expected to be travelling in daylight and it was now pitch black and pouring rain. I could barely see, not to mention that I’d now gone 2 days without sleep and could barely keep my eyes open.

I found an Autobahn and headed north. When I got to Köln (Cologne) I turned west, towards Belgium. I could ask for directions at the border.

Soon, there ahead was a red and white barrier, raised, and a hut for the border guards. But the lights were out. No guard! (So much for the story we get of the undefended border between Canada and the US - that’s a lie). So I wasn’t going to be able to ask for directions.

But worse, the sign said ‘welkom in Nederland’. I was entering Holland!

I didn’t know what to do. I was obviously lost. No map. No idea where I was. Nobody to ask. And I didn’t speak the language if I did find anybody.

Oh well, carry on and hope to find a Tankstelle (gas station).

No luck. I drove for about 10 km and then came to another border crossing. This one said ‘bienvenue en Belgique’. At least I was still going the right direction. This was Belgium.

After a few more adventures, I finally found Scherpenheuvel. But I couldn’t find my friend’s house. I asked directions to Rootstraat but every time before I found it I kept coming to a white sign with Scherpenheuvel on it surrounded by a red circle with a diagonal red line through it. I guessed that meant I was now leaving Scherpenheuvel.

I’d finally had enough. It was now about 5 AM and I just had to sleep. I was so tired I could barely think. So I pulled off into a field, got out the red wool blanket from Iceland (I’d hid it in my luggage instead of returning it when I was supposed to) got into the back seat and was immediately asleep.

It seemed like only minutes later somebody was pounding on the window.

I opened my eyes to see bright daylight. I’d actually slept several hours.

More pounding! And now an angry voice shouting in Flemish, a language I had no idea how to translate.

I rolled down the window to more shouting. I tried German. No use. French. That got a response.

It turned out he was part of a team for a scheduled football (soccer) match and I was parked in the middle of the pitch. Could I please move my car so they could get on with their game?

I was awake enough now to function on about 3-cylinders. I got into the driver’s seat and slowly moved off the soccer field.

I found a bakery and phoned my friend to come and get me. It had been 23 years since we’d last hitchhiked all over Europe together as teenagers. He was taller and thinner than I was back then. Now he was short and round. He used to have long, blond hair in a sort of Beatles cut. Now he was bald. But I recognized that friendly grin right away. We embraced. It had been a long time.

When I followed him back to his house, we went past the sign with the big red circle around the name Scherpenheuvel and turned at the next street. His was the third house on the street. I’d missed it by no more than 200 meters.

It turned out that the sign meant ‘you are now leaving the business district of Scherpenheuvel’, not leaving Scherpenheuvel.

But of course after 23 years there’s was a lot of catching up to do and no time for me to sleep. I had to have breakfast with his family, his wife and his kids. Then he took me for a tour around his town and the next city nearby, Diest, which was a big tourist destination. Then off to see his parents, who knew me when I was a teenager too, and on and on.

It wasn’t until late that night that I finally got to bed - 3 days after I’d had a good night’s sleep in a real bed.

It was only seconds before I was sound asleep.

Epilogue

After a couple of weeks I got home and went to visit my parents a day or so later.

One of the first things my mother asked was if I’d heard on the news about the aircraft that had caught fire halfway across the Atlantic and landed in Iceland.

I told her that no, I hadn’t had the chance to watch any news while I was over in Europe, and besides, even if I had I wouldn’t have understood what they were saying.

She was surprised that I hadn’t heard about it and proceeded to tell me about the incident in detail until I stopped her and told her that while I hadn’t heard anything about it, I was indeed quite aware of what had happened.

Then I told her my side of the story.
