The vision of Digital India is centred on 3 Key Areas
Digital Infrastructure as a Utility to Every Citizen
Governance & Services on Demand
Digital Empowerment of Citizens
To make this vision a reality, Digital India has been based on 9 pillars as summarised below
Broadband Highways – Providing optical fibre backbone based Broadband up to 2.5 Lakh
Gram Panchayats.
Universal Access to Mobile Connectivity – Mobile coverage to be extended to remaining
uncovered villages.
Public Internet Access Programme – Public access to internet to enable delivery of services
e-Governance: Reforming Government through Technology – Providing governance to
the public through electronic means
e-Kranti - Electronic Delivery of Services – This would include education, health care,
financial inclusion, GIS based applications etc
Information for All – Online hosting of information for public.
Electronics Manufacturing – Target Net Zero imports of electronics by 2020 by improving
domestic electronics manufacturing.
IT for Jobs – Train people in small towns and villages for IT based jobs.
Early Harvest Programmes – This programme includes things like Wi-Fi for all universities,
Secure email within government, standardised eemail design templates, biometric attendance
etc.
Army and Digital India
The Army, since Independence, has lead the national effort in a number of ways and Digital India is a
programme where it can become a lead contributor.
Some examples where the Army has already taken lead in building the Digital India vision are as
under
Network for Spectrum Optical Fibre project is a pan India network which will have the
requisite band width for Broadband Highways.
ARPAN 3.0, an automation software for Army personnel, has been launched by the Defence
Minister. It provides the Army personnel easy access to their service records, such as salary,
leave, transfer and postings. This is digital empowerment of members of the Army.
The vision of Digital India can be the vision for all ranks of the Army too. Let us look into the role the
Army can play in the 9 pillars of Digital India
Broadband Highways – The Network for Spectrum Optical Fibre Network is already being
implemented on ground and will provide the backbone infrastructure required for Broadband
Highways. It should be feasible to cover this network right down to battalion level.
Universal Access to Mobile Connectivity – The booming mobile phone industry is enabling
access to Smart Phones to all citizens of the country. This is making it possible for all ranks of
Armed Forces to have access to Smart Phones. Armed Forces would have a role to play to
ensure that mobile tower infrastructure is given access in defence areas to enable Armed
Forces personnel to access mobile communications.
Public Internet Access Program – Internet today is becoming a necessity for all citizens.
The mobile service providers are already providing this service on mobile phones. The issue
of providing free wi-fi hotspots in military areas will have to be examined from the security
point of view. It is possible to provide Internet access to all ranks with suitable security
instructions and a monitoring mechanism without impinging on privacy.
eGovernance – In respect of Army, this would imply providing administrative services in eformat.This is one area where Army needs to work a lot. Our services,for example in
Cantonments, are still paper based with large lead times. Army needs to make an
eGovernance task force to steer this on a fast track basis. Another aspect which needs
consideration is to provide all ranksaccess to their home station eGovernance portal from
their place of posting.This will ease a large number of their problems.
e-Kranti – With expectations on the rise ,eKranti is another area where the Army can make a
difference for its personnel. Some areas of activity can be
e-Education – All training institutions can be interconnected and Digital based
education can be provided. We can develop pilot projects on Massive Online Open
Courses (MOOCs). Some work is already underway in this field.
e-Healthcare – Healthcare is an area which can have a revolutionary effect. Online
medical records, Pan India exchange of patient information, online consultation etc are
few of the many possibilities in improving health care access to all personnel.
GIS – Armed Forces can be part of the National GIS Mission Mode Project and use its
facilities for GIS based decision making.
Security – Technology can be leveraged to improve security, something which is a
necessity as far as Army is concerned. Cyber Security needs to be given the impetus
required to safeguard us from Cyber Threats.
Financial Inclusion – We are aware that majority of our personnel are financially
illiterate and have limited access to financial services. Financial inclusion will help
personnel posted in field areas to easily transfer money and do a host of financial
transactions without having to visit government offices/banking institutions.
Information for All – The Army has already taken a number of measures to provide
information to all ranks on both the Army Intranet and the internet. The Army can easily work
towards providing more valuable information to all ranks.
Electronics Manufacturing – Majority of the Indian Army weapon platforms are imported.
Key components of these imports are electronics. The Army can contribute towards the aim of
net zero import by 2020 by closely working with the industry to source electronics items from
local manufacturers.
IT for Jobs- While the aim of IT for jobs is make an IT ready workforce, Army also needs to
train all personnel in the IT domain. It will help them being IT literate as well as make them
industry ready when they leave the Army.
Early Harvest Programme -The programme can be utilised by the Armed Forces as under
Wi-Fi in all Universities – For the Army, this can be implemented as Wi-Fi for all
Training establishments. Wi-Fi access in Training establishments is feasible with fewer
security issues.
Secure email within Government – The process of providing government emails has
already commenced. Army can fast track this process to ensure that all authorised
users are provided secure Government email, which in turn would become the primary
mode of communication outside of the Army Intranet. It will enable official
communications to move away from Gmail, Yahoo Mail etc
Standardised Government email Design – As is being done by the government, we
will also have to design our email design templates as per our requirements .While
such templates are already functional in the Army intranet, templates where mail has to
be sent by internet needs to be worked out.